Our sun is considered an average star.
Yet, the energy from the sun
that reaches the earth is thousands of times
the world’s total energy use.
With our unaided eyes,
we might see about 3,000 stars
on a dark night
—many in a fuzzy band.
The Milky Way galaxy
is where our sun
is just one of perhaps
200 to 400 billion stars.
Astronomers think the Milky Way galaxy
is clustered together
with around 100,000 large galaxies
in a massive structure called a supercluster
that together with an estimated
two trillion galaxies
make up the known physical universe.
Countless stars
spread over unfathomable distances,
releasing immense amounts of energy
may be impossible to grasp for us
—but not for Jehovah.
“He counts the number of the stars;
“he calls all of them by name.
Our Lord is great and is mighty in power.”
Millions of cubic meters of water
circulate continually around our planet.
Near the poles, water that is colder,
saltier, and denser sinks,
creating a flow almost 100 times
that of the Amazon River.
This drives a massive circulation of water
that may take 1,000 years to complete
—the global ocean conveyor belt.
This enormous system distributes heat,
which helps to stabilize the weather
and transport great quantities
of nutrients around the world
so that life
may flourish in abundance.
Jehovah set these mechanisms in motion
and understands them perfectly.
“You rule over the raging of the sea;
when its waves surge, you calm them.”
Trees can grow very strong
and withstand powerful forces.
But if they didn’t decompose after they die,
trees and leaves would pile up
with their nutrients locked away inside.
Yet, they do decompose.
How?
Most animals cannot eat
fallen wood and leaves,
but fungi can.
They break down the dead plant tissues,
making them softer.
Beetles and termites
bore through the wood,
exposing more surface area
and spreading the fungi inside,
which soften it further
so that other insects
can enjoy the feast.
Earthworms aerate the soil
and pull nutrients down
where they can be used by other plants.
Decomposers have been called
the unsung heroes of the natural world.
They recycle organic matter
so that it is available
to support new life.
Through this process,
Jehovah made it possible for us
to enjoy earth’s lush beauty
—generation after generation.
“Let the fields
and everything in them rejoice.
“At the same time let all the trees
of the forest shout joyfully.”
Hail
—though it is made of ice,
it is very different from snow.
Hail usually forms in warm weather
when turbulent air produces thunderstorms
with powerful updrafts.
Those updrafts can pull a piece of dust
or ice high into the cloud,
where water freezes around it.
Each trip up into the cloud
adds a layer of ice
and waits
until it becomes
a hailstone that is heavy enough to fall.
Hailstorms can be powerfully destructive.
One deadly storm dropped hailstones
weighing more than one kilogram (2 lbs) each.
Jehovah used hail to demonstrate his power
and defend his people,
such as during
the seventh plague against Egypt.
When Joshua fought the Amorites,
Jehovah caused a great hailstorm,
and more Amorites died from the hailstones
than in battle.
Hail is also mentioned among the elements
that Jehovah will use in the future
against those who attack his people.
“Have you seen the storehouses of the hail,
“which I have reserved
for the . . . day of battle and war?”
The largest animal alive on earth today
is also the largest that has ever lived
—the blue whale.
Blue whales can grow to be
over 30 meters (98 feet) long
and weigh up to 180 tons.
Its heart alone may weigh
several hundred kilograms.
How does such a large creature
find enough to eat?
The blue whale migrates great distances
to find tiny crustaceans
known as krill.
When a blue whale
finds a school of krill,
it accelerates toward the krill
and opens its giant mouth.
They may engulf
hundreds of kilograms of krill
with each lunge
amounting to several tons per day.
Blue whales eat a lot.
Yet, Jehovah provides for them,
and he will provide for us.
“There is the sea, so great and wide,
“teeming with countless living things,
both small and great.”
Our bones
are amazing.
They support our bodies,
protect our organs,
and store almost all
of the body’s calcium
—a mineral essential for our health.
For their weight,
bones are very strong.
The feet of a track and field jumper
may experience forces
of several times his body weight.
Bones can compress and bend,
but sometimes they break.
A fractured bone
can heal well if properly set.
Inflammation brings
organic building blocks to the area,
and soft tissue grows
between the broken pieces.
The soft tissue
is replaced with harder tissue.
The body replaces the harder tissue
with new bone until the repair is complete.
In children,
the break may heal
without leaving a trace.
Jehovah gave every bone in our body
this incredible ability to heal.
“I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way
I am wonderfully made.”